update(design): Add Design for Durable Storage (#3228)
emqtt/emq-docs-cn: en_US/design/durable-storage.md

#### Topic–Timestamp–Value

The minimal storage unit, representing a single MQTT message. Each TTV includes:

- **Topic:** Follows MQTT semantics.

- **Timestamp:** Write time or logical ordering key.

- **Value:** An arbitrary binary blob.

## Write Path

Data writes to DS can use either **append-only mode** or **ACID transactions**.

### Append-Only Mode

This mode supports only the **appending of data**, offering minimal overhead for high-throughput scenarios.

### ACID Transactions

Transactions rely on **Optimistic Concurrency Control (OCC)**, assuming that clients typically operate on non-conflicting data subsets. If a conflict occurs, only one contender succeeds in committing the transaction; the others are aborted and retried.

**Transaction Flow:**

1. **Initiation:** A client process (Tx) requests the Leader node to create a transaction context (containing the Leader's term and last committed serial number).

> 2. **Operations:** The client schedules reads (added to the context), writes, and deletes. It also sets commit preconditions (e.g., check for the existence/non-existence of specific TTVs). Scheduled writes/deletes only materialize upon full commitment and replication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Operations:** Durable storage transaction is represented by an Erlang function. In the body of the function the client can read data (information about accessed topics and time ranges is added to the transaction context), schedule writes and deletes. The client can also set commit preconditions (checks for the existence/non-existence of specific TTVs). Reads are executed immediately, while scheduled writes/deletes only materialize upon full commitment and replication.
```

Reviewer: I rephrased this to emphasize the difference in handling side-effect free operations (reads) vs. the rest.

3. **Submission & Verification:** The client sends the list of operations to the Leader.
   - The Leader checks the preconditions against the latest data snapshot.
   - It verifies that the reads do not conflict with recent writes.
4. **"Cooking (preparing)" and Logging:** If successful, the Leader "cooks" the transaction:
   - It assigns written TTVs to streams.

>    - It creates a deterministic list of low-level storage mutations applicable to all replicas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **"Cooking (preparing)" and Logging:** If successful, the Leader "cooks" the transaction:
   - It assigns each written TTVs to on of the streams, creating new streams if necessary.
   - It creates a list of low-level storage mutations that can be applied to all replicas in a deterministic manner.
```

Reviewer: Phrase "deterministic list" doesn't make much sense.

- **Benefits:** This enables efficient queries such as `metrics/my_host/cpu/#` or `metrics/+/cpu/socket/1/core/+`.

### Real-Time Subscriptions

Readers can also access data in real time using the subscription mechanism. The `subscribe` API, also based on iterators, allows DS to push data to subscribers instead of requiring clients to poll for data.

DS maintains two pools of subscribers: 

- **Catch-up subscribers** read historical data and, upon reaching the end, become real-time subscribers. 
- **Real-time subscriptions** are event-based and activate only when new data is written to DS.

Both pools group subscribers by stream and topic, reusing resources to serve multiple subscribers simultaneously. This approach saves IOPS when reading from disk and reduces network bandwidth when sending data to remote clients. A batch of messages, a list of subscription IDs, and a sparse dispatch matrix are sent across the cluster to remote nodes hosting subscribers, which then dispatches messages to local clients.

<img src="./assets/real-time_subscriptions.png" alt="real-time_subscriptions" style="zoom:67%;" />

## Conclusion: The Foundation of High-Reliability MQTT

> The Optimized Durable Storage in EMQX 6.0 is the resilient foundation for high-reliability MQTT messaging. By re-engineering RocksDB and embedding concepts like TTVs and Streams, DS provides a purpose-built, highly available, and persistent internal database. This architecture, coupled with sophisticated features like the LTS algorithm and Raft replication, ensures lossless message delivery and optimal retrieval for complex wildcard and shared subscriptions, solidifying EMQX's position as a leading solution for demanding IoT infrastructure.

Reviewer: We didn't re-engineer RocksDB... We just built on top of it. I think this entire paragraph can be removed: it's fit for blog but not for technical documentation.

# Design for Durable Storage

> EMQX 6.0 introduces Optimized Durable Storage (DS), a purpose-built application designed to ensure high reliability and persistence for MQTT message delivery. DS combines the strengths of a streaming service (like Kafka) and a key-value store, providing a robust, highly optimized foundation for storing, replaying, and managing MQTT data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EMQX 6.0 introduces Optimized Durable Storage (DS), a purpose-built database abstraction layer designed to ensure high reliability and persistence for MQTT message delivery. DS combines the strengths of a streaming service (like Kafka) and a key-value store, providing a robust, highly optimized foundation for storing, replaying, and managing MQTT data.
```

## Architecture: Backends and Storage Hierarchy

> Durable Storage is implementation-agnostic, using a backend layer to allow data to be stored across different database management systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Durable Storage is implementation-agnostic, using a backend concept to allow data to be stored across different database management systems.
```

### Embedded Backends

EMQX provides two embedded backends that do not rely on third-party services: 

- The `builtin_local` backend uses RocksDB as the storage engine and is intended for single-node deployments. 
- The `builtin_raft` backend extends `builtin_local` with support for clustering and data replication across different sites.

### Data Storage Hierarchy

Internally, DS organizes data into a multi-layered hierarchy designed for both horizontal scalability and temporal partitioning. The structure is transparent to applications and ensures efficient data management across distributed EMQX nodes.

The complete DS hierarchy can be represented as follows:

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    %% Durable Storage Hierarchy Diagram
    DB["Database (DB)"]
    SH["Shard"]
    GEN(["Generation (logical, time-based)"])
    SL["Slab (physical container)"]
    ST["Stream"]
    TTV["Topic–Timestamp–Value (TTV)"]

    %% Main hierarchy
    DB --> SH --> SL --> ST --> TTV

    %% Logical relationship

>     GEN -. labels .- SL

Reviewer: `labels`?

    %% Styling
    classDef box fill:#f9f9ff,stroke:#666,stroke-width:1px,rx:6,ry:6;
    class DB,SH,SL,ST,TTV,GEN box;

```

#### Database (DB)

The top-level logical container for data. Each DS database is independent and manages its own shards, slabs, and streams, and it can be created, managed, and dropped as needed. For instance:

- **Sessions DB** stores durable session states.
- **Messages DB** holds the corresponding MQTT message data.

A single EMQX cluster may host multiple DS databases.

#### Shard

> A horizontal partition of the database. Data from different MQTT clients or topics is distributed across shards to support parallelism and high availability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A horizontal partition of the database. Data from different MQTT clients is distributed across shards to support parallelism and high availability.
```

I don't think we ever use sharding by topic.

Each EMQX node can host one or more shards, and shards can be replicated across nodes for redundancy.

#### Generation

A logical partition of the database by time. Data written at different times may be assigned to different generations. Periodically creating new generations serves several main purposes:

1. **Backward compatibility and data migrations:** New data is appended to new generations, possibly with improved encoding, while old generations remain immutable and read-only.
2. **Time-based data retention:** Since each generation covers a specific time period, old data can be removed by dropping entire generations.

Although conceptually related to slabs, generations are not physical containers. They serve as temporal boundaries that organize slabs within each shard.

#### Slab

> A physical partition of data identified by both shard ID and generation ID. Each slab acts as a durable container for one or more streams. All data in a slab share the same encoding schema, and writes are atomic, eliminating the need for extra metadata.

Reviewer: Phrasing here is a bit confusing:

> and writes are atomic, eliminating the need for extra metadata.

Atomicity of writes is unrelated to message metadata. These are two separate properties. I would rephrase it as following:
```suggestion
A physical partition of data identified by both shard ID and generation ID. Each slab acts as a durable container for one or more streams. All data in a slab share the same encoding schema, eliminating the need for storing extra metadata. Atomicity and consistency properties are guaranteed within a slab.
```

Example: `shard 2, gen 3` represents a distinct slab that stores all streams written during that generation’s time range.

#### Stream

> Logical units of batching and serialization inside each slab. Streams group **Topic–Timestamp–Value (TTV)** triples with similar structures, allowing data to be read in time-ordered, deterministic chunks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Logical units of batching and serialization inside each slab. Streams group **Topic–Timestamp–Value (TTV)** triples with similar topics, allowing data to be read in time-ordered, deterministic chunks.
```

Streams are also the unit of subscription and iteration in DS, enabling efficient handling of wildcard topic filters. 

#### Topic–Timestamp–Value

> The minimal storage unit, representing a single MQTT record. Each TTV includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The minimal storage unit, representing a single MQTT message. Each TTV includes:
```

- **State:** Durable sessions access saved messages via the DS subscription mechanism. Their state includes a set of iterators for each matching stream, allowing them to precisely track their progress. Only one copy of each message is stored per database replica, regardless of how many durable sessions share it.

### Shared Subscriptions (EMQX 6.0)

EMQX 6.0 extended DS to shared subscriptions for enhanced load balancing and reliability.

- **Iterator Management:** The iterator sets for shared subscriptions are managed by a separate entity called the **shared sub leader**.
- **Replay and Rebalancing:** Sessions subscribing to a shared topic communicate with the leader, which **lends them iterators** for message replay. Updated iterators are reported back. If a client disconnects or the group is rebalanced, the leader **revokes the iterators** and redistributes them to other members, ensuring consumption continuity and load distribution.

## Conclusion: The Foundation of High-Reliability MQTT

> The Optimized Durable Storage in EMQX 6.0 is the resilient foundation for high-reliability MQTT messaging. By re-engineering RocksDB and embedding concepts like TTVs and Streams, DS provides a purpose-built, highly available, and persistent internal database. This architecture, coupled with sophisticated features like the LTS algorithm and Raft replication, ensures lossless message delivery and optimal retrieval for complex wildcard and shared subscriptions, solidifying EMQX's position as a leading solution for demanding IoT infrastructure.

Reviewer: I think this part should be moved to "durable storage introduction" document, since it concerns the users.
